Portfolio (#2)
d-r-q/developing-ergonomic-code: azhidkov.pro/content/portfolio.en.adoc

---
title: "Portfolio"
description: Software development and reengineering
date: 2021-03-13T13:25:37+07:00
draft: false
---
:!table-caption:

== Aleksey Zhidkov
*Architect, Tech Lead* +
https://azhidkov.pro +
https://github.com/d-r-q

{empty} +

I specialize in developing information systems (link:++{{< ref "portfolio#lobby">}}++[[1]],link:++{{< ref "portfolio#tcs">}}++[[2]],link:++{{< ref "portfolio#threads">}}++[[3]]) powered by the Java platform.
However, I'm quite versatile thanks to having nineteen years of experience, loving what I do, and reading English fluently.

> All of these allow me to dabble in developing link:++{{< ref "portfolio#yts_bot" >}}++[Python desktop apps], link:++{{< ref "portfolio#lpx">}}++[low-level video capture software with C], and link:++{{< ref "portfolio#udobno">}}++[Kotlin Multiplatform Mobile apps].

Reviewer: dabble - кажется не то слово:)
Это всё были коммерческие проекты, 2 из которых эксплуатируются и сейчас, а один благополучно проверял гипотезу, пока его и эпл и гугл не забанили из-за самой задумки:)

I've been working as a software engineer since 2005, and as an independent consultant since 2017.

Apart from creating software, I've been working as a lecturer and thesis advisor at Novosibirsk State University across two departments since 2007.

Since 2020, I've also been writing my own https://t.me/ergonomic_code[Telegram channel (rus)], a link:++{{ref "posts">}}++[blog (rus)], and link:++{{< ref "book/ergo">}}++[a book (rus)] about my approach to software design and engineering.

{empty} +

=== Education

* Ph.D. candidate at the Federal Research Center for Information and Computational Technologies, 2018-2019.
My research was focused on conflict resolution for asynchronous data replication.
It was based on a prototype of an https://github.com/d-r-q/qbit[embedded multi-version DBMS] I devised myself.
I had to take a temporary break from my studies in connection with my child's birth.
* Computer Science, Novosibirsk State University, 2009.
* Higher College of Informatics, Novosibirsk State University, 2006.

{empty} +

=== Key skills and competencies

> * I take an ergonomic approach to developing fast, reliable, and easily maintainable software (https://azhidkov.pro/book/ergo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I take an ergonomic approach to developing fast, reliable, and easily maintainable software (link:++{{< ref "book/ergo">}}++).
```

> * I know of and apply in my work some design principles other than SOLID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I know of and apply in my work more design principles than just SOLID.
```

** Right now, procedural programming is the generally preferred development paradigm.
** Both OOP and FP are syntactic sugar.
** OOD and FD aren't mutually exclusive—on the contrary, they can only produce a good design when used together.
* Programming languages:
** Kotlin, Java: I've been working with both on a professional level since 2012 and 2002, respectively.
** JavaScript, Python, C: I have some successful commercial experience.
** Rust, Clojure, Scala, OCaml, Groovy, Eiffel: I have studied these out of sheer curiosity but never got the chance to apply any in my work.
* The relational model and SQL.
With DBMSes, I prefer PostgreSQL.
* Spring Boot + Web MVC/Flux, Ktor.
* Spring Data (JDBC, R2DBC), jooq, Ebean.
* Testing automation: xUnit, testcontainers, mutational testing, property testing.
* Git, Gradle.

{empty} +

=== Portfolio

==== I&C Systems Company

I started out as an independent consultant back in summer 2017 with this project.
It involved developing a server for data collection from electric meters.

Here are some interesting highlights:

. I had to deliver a flexible system for scheduling electric meters polling.

> . The polling was to be conducted via binary closed protocols, which I had to develop myself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The polling was to be conducted via binary closed protocols, which I had to implement myself.
```

---

==== Excelsior (Excelsior at Huawei now)

Excelsior became my last employer and one of my first private clients :)

===== Fixing sync issues in the SWING interface of a Teledyne Optech mobile lidar

Back in 2016 when I was still working at Excelsior, I found and fixed a memory leak in the SWING interface of mobile lidars produced by Teledyne Optech, one of Excelsior's clients.
So when in summer 2017 Teledyne Optech reached out to Excelsior again with some issues in that app, the job was handed over to me on a subcontract basis.

> The app was initially developed by an intern who hasn't been able to find a perfect implementation of flow synchronization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The app was initially developed by an intern who hasn't been able to find a sound implementation of threads synchronization.
```

|
|===

===== Tomcat 8.5 and 9 support in Excelsior JET

One of my last tasks before leaving Excelsior was to provide support for Tomcat 8 in Excelsior JET.
So when in October 2017 they had to add support for Tomcat 8.5 and 9, Excelsior handed this job over to me on a contract basis.

> For this task, I had to reverse-engineer the web apps class loader in Tomcat and the way it plays out in the compiler and Excelsior JET's runtime.

Reviewer: на всякий случай: тут "вопспроизведение" - это не "проигрывание", а "повторение".

оборот the way it plays out мне не знаком, но и яндекс и гугла преводят его в смысле "как загрузкичк работает в компиляторе".
а корректный смысл: "воспроизведение работы загрузкчика классов в компиляторе и рантайме Excelsior JET.

|===

[#lpx]
===== R&D of a video capture system for custom camera, The Siberian Center of Transport Technologies

The Siberian Center of Transport Technologies is the company developing high-tech tools for the Russian Railways.
Their flagship products were based on Windows, but in spring 2018, they decided to also give Linux a try.
That's why they went to me.

> For the pilot project, they chose to make a prototype of a video capture system for a custom camera that would receive signals from an already existing tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the pilot project, they chose to make a prototype of a video capture system for a custom camera that would receive signals from one of their existing device.
```

This project turned out to be one of the most fascinating and complex ones I've ever worked on.
First, it was the first–and so far the last–commercial experience I've had with C.
Second, I got the chance to do some work with hardware directly.
That's a whole different experience :)
Finally, I tried my hand at multithreaded and network programming with a language that has no synchronized block or garbage collector.

The system's workflow was supposed to look like this:

. The system would listen for requests from a custom device connected to it via USB (we switched to a simple GPIO switcher later on);
. Once it receives a command, the system beings to capture the video stream from a custom camera connected to it via CSI and save it to the drive.

> . There also was a separate HTTP server that would, on request, make screenshots within a specified time interval and pack them into a zip archive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. There also was a separate HTTP server that would, on request, find frames within a specified time interval and pack them into a zip archive.
```
Сервер сам не делал кадры, он выдавал архивом кадры с диска, записанные туда основной программой.

|===

[#lobby]
===== Company "X", project "L": a server for a business hypothesis validation app
In winter 2021, Siberian.Pro started working on a new project for Company "X", a gambling provider.
The client wanted the back-end system to be powered by the Java platform.
Siberian.Pro reached out to me again.

At the time of me writing this text, Project "L" is still in the development stage.
The project is to validate a business hypothesis regarding the efficiency of a new game translation mechanic.
For that reason, Project "L" delegates most of its functionality to the main system.

Here are some interesting spotlights:

. The project is quite demanding performance-wise, which is why I've picked the reactive stack.
. I'm using Kotlin Coroutines to make working with the reactive stack as simple and straightforward as with the synchronized one.
. Because of the app's nature, I have to be constantly looking to balance between the system's response time and data consistency.

> . link:++{{< ref "posts/21/03/210321-project-l-testing">}}++[Automated testing is set up] in such a way that the client has only seen 1 (one) bug and 0 (zero) regressions over two months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. link:++{{< ref "posts/21/03/210321-project-l-testing">}}++[Automated testing is set up (rus)] in such a way that the client has only seen 3 (three) bugs and 1 (one) regressions over four months, 11K slocs and two major changes in requirements understanding.
```
:)

[#tcs]
===== Data Transfer server

Once they were done with the app, Trading Club switched to developing a mobile app that could keep track of their bot's work.
In summer 2020, Trading Club decided they want to arrange all the disparate parts of the app into a solid whole.
That's why they reached out to me again.

The project consisted of developing a server that would provide three APIs:

> . an API for the bot to save the data;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. an API for the bot to share the data;
```

---

> ==== Gaymon Production

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== GameOn Production
```

[#udobno]
===== Android and iOS app prototypes for validating a business hypothesis

> In spring 2019, Gaymon Production asked me to develop a prototype of an Android app that was to validate a business hypothesis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In spring 2019, GameOn Production asked me to develop a prototype of an Android app that was to validate a business hypothesis.
```

---

[#threads]

> ==== Bruma Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Brooma Service
```

===== Reingeneering the reporting module

> One of Burma's products is Threads, an end-to-end solution for handling customer communication via chats and messengers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of Boorma's products is Threads, an end-to-end solution for handling customer communication via chats and messengers.
```

> In spring 2019, Bruma wanted Threads' report module reingeneered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In spring 2019, Brooma wanted Threads' report module reingeneered.
```

They didn't have enough hands in-house for that back then, which is why they reached out to me.

Originally, the module had about 20 caching-related issues that were hard to diagnose.
It would consume too much memory when running, which was causing the main app to fail.

To solve the problem, I:

* reverse-engineered the original module;
* spawned it off into a separate process; and
* set going a data streamline from the database server to the client browser via two apps powered by Spring Web MVC.

Setting up the data streamline and interacting with JDBC directly allowed to resolve the original module's problems, significantly improve on its performance, and fix all the memory-related issues.

The project took much longer than expected.
Nonetheless, we continued to work together on an outstaff basis and kept it going for one year and a half.

===== Reengineering the routing module

> In summer 2020, I promptly reengineered the routing module for Bruma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summer 2020, I promptly reengineered the routing module for Brooma.
```

The routing module is the system's 'heart' acting as an intermediary between the clients and the operators.
If it's down, the entire system is as well.

Over the development years, the module had accumulated much technical debt, which eventually led to some serious performance issues.

> This has taken its toll on one of Bruma's strategic clients who noticed a significant drop in their service quality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has taken its toll on one of Brooma's strategic clients who noticed a significant drop in their service quality.
```

In two weeks, I brought the first reengineered version of this module in full accordance with link:++{{< ref "book/ergo" >}}++[the ergonomic approach's principles].

> This allowed for quite impressive 300x growth in the system's output with no functional losses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allowed for quite impressive 300x growth in the system's throughput with no functional losses.
```

---

==== Employment experience

*Company and position:* Novosibirsk State University, Lecturer and Thesis Advisor +
*Time of employment:* September 2009 – current position +

> * I'm the lecturer for the 'Databases' course (2018—current position).

Reviewer: Тут точно current position, а не moment?

{empty} +

*Company and position:* Playtox, Engineer +
*Time of employment:* September 2012 – May 2013  +
I was developing a platform for mobile MMO games.

{empty} +

*Company and position:* Alexey Sukhorukov's Hiring Agency, Java Expert +
*Time of employment:* June 2010 – August 2013 +
I was evaluating job candidates' Java skill level.

{empty} +

*Company and position:* Alavar.ru/HD Soft (since November 2009), Engineer +
*Time of employment:* October 2008 – September 2012 +
I was developing a Java platform and applications for US digital cable boxes.

{empty} +

*Company and position:* Innovative Technologies, Engineer +
*Time of employment:* March 2008 – October 2008 +
I was developing a city guidance portal called Gorod-Gid ("City guide").

{empty} +

*Company and position:* Novosibirsk State University, Higher College of Informatics, Lecturer and Thesis Advisor +
*Time of employment:* February 2007 – July 2016 +
I was a lecturer for 'Translators,' a base project.

{empty} +

*Company and position:* KB Inform, engineer +
*Time of employment:* January 2006 – March 2008 +
I was working on an automated system for the commercial account of electric power.

{empty} +

> *Company and position:* TrendSV, Junior Engineer +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Company and position:* TrendSW, Junior Engineer +
```
